You have already prepared your eclipse. Now you can try to install DIRAC and the Web portal locally. The instruction is given for MAC OS users, but it is similar to Linux users as well. I use different directory for developing WebAppDIRAC than the directory where the portal is installed. I always copy the code from the development area to the installed area in case when I wanted to test it. The next section I will give an instruction about how to install DIRAC and WebAppDIRAC.

Install DIRAC 
###############
-I propose to read the following documentation and after continue to install DIRAC (https://github.com/DIRACGrid/DIRAC/wiki/GitSetup).

1. Create a directory where you will install DIRAC and WebAppDIRAC: mkdir portal; cd portal

2. git clone git://github.com/zmathe/DIRAC.git (NOTE: This works when you forked the DIRAC repository). or execute: git clone https://github.com/DIRACGrid/DIRAC.git

3. git clone git://github.com/zmathe/WebAppDIRAC.git (NOTE: This works when you forked the WebAppDIRAC repository on github)

4. ./scripts/dirac-install -r v6r10p15 -X -t server (You can use the current production version of DIRAC which can found http://diracgrid.org.
If DIRAC properly installed, you can continue to install WebAppDIRAC.

5. ./WebAppDIRAC/dirac-postInstall.py

6. source bashrc (we have to use the correct python in order to install tornado)

7. pip install tornado

8. mkdir etc

9. you need to create: vi etc/dirac.cfg file and copy the following lines to this file:
::

  DIRAC {
    Setup = LHCb-Development
    #Setup = LHCb-Production
    #Setup = LHCb-Certification
    Configuration {
      Servers = dips://lhcb-conf-dirac.cern.ch:9135/Configuration/Server
      Servers += dips://lhcbprod.pic.es:9135/Configuration/Server
    }
  }

Install WebAppDIRAC
####################